14. (1) Subject to subsection (2), a person who contravenes section 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 or 10 or subsection 13 (16) is guilty of an offence and on conviction is liable to a fine determined in accordance with subsection (3).
Continuing offence, signs
(2) A person who is convicted of contravening section 6 or clause 10 (3) (c) or (6) (c) is liable to the fine determined in accordance with subsection (3) for each day or part of a day on which the offence occurs or continues.
Determining maximum fine
(3) The fine, or daily fine, as the case may be, shall not exceed an amount determined as follows:
1. Establish the number of times the defendant has been convicted of the same offence during the five years preceding the current conviction.
2. If the defendant is an individual, the amount is set out in Column 3 of the Table to this section, opposite the number of previous convictions in Column 2 and the section or subsection number of the provision contravened in Column 1.
3. If the defendant is a corporation, the amount is set out in Column 4 of the Table to this section, opposite the number of previous convictions in Column 2 and the section or subsection number of the provision contravened in Column 1.
Sequence of convictions
(4) In establishing the number of times the defendant has been convicted of the same offence for the purposes of subsection (3), the only question to be considered is the sequence of convictions, and no consideration shall be given to the sequence of commission of offences or to whether an offence occurred before or after a conviction.
Continuing offence, vending machine
(5) A person who contravenes subsection 9 (1) is guilty of an offence and on conviction is liable, for each day or part of a day on which the offence occurs or continues, to a fine of not more than $2,000.
Offence, smoking in motor vehicle
(6) A person who contravenes section 12 is guilty of an offence and on conviction is liable to a fine of not more than $250.
Duty of directors and officers
(7) A director or officer of a corporation that engages in the manufacture, sale or distribution of electronic cigarettes has a duty to take all reasonable care to prevent the corporation from contravening this Act.
Offence
(8) A person who has the duty imposed by subsection (7) and fails to carry it out is guilty of an offence and on conviction is liable to a fine of not more than $100,000.